# Classification of cells into types

Given that a core goal of the Human Cell Atlas is to advance knowledge about _all_ human cell types, [@wikidata:Q46368626] the definition of what a cell type is becomes important. 
Although a number of views exist [@wikidata:Q87649649; @doi:10.1242/dev.169854; @doi:10.1242/dev.178996; @wikidata:Q47565008; @wikidata:Q99418657; @wikidata:Q98665291; @wikidata:Q93086971; @wikidata:Q26770736; @wikidata:Q35688096; @wikidata:Q98633613; @wikidata:Q99418649; @wikidata:Q40436539; @wikidata:Q108723646], there is no formal, commonly agreed upon defintion of cell type. 
A 2017 article on the Human Cell Atlas mentions[@wikidata:Q47565008]: 

"Descriptors such as ‘cell type’ and ‘cell state’ can be difficult to define at the moment. An integrative, systematic effort by many teams of scientists working together and bringing different expertise to the problem could dramatically sharpen our terminology, and revolutionize the way we see our cells, tissues and organs. We invite you to join the effort." 
The article highlights both the current gap in knowledge and the need of a community effort to work in that direction, in a direction that justifies the existence of the present work. 

One consequence of a lack of a definition is that there is no commonly agreed number of cell types, and not even on an order of magnitude. 
As of November 2021, the leading answers in the Google Search Engine for the question "How many different cell types are found in the human body?" all point to around 200 different types (https://askabiologist.asu.edu/questions/human-cell-types, https://www.researchgate.net/post/How-many-cell-types-in-a-human-body-How-about-the-number-of-cell-cycles-in-each-species, https://www.kenhub.com/en/library/anatomy/types-of-cells-in-the-human-body), an estimate that is agreed upon by Bionumbers, a database of useful biological numbers [@wikidata:Q24643881] (https://bionumbers.hms.harvard.edu/bionumber.aspx?id=103626).
A list of cell types in the adult human body on Wikipedia also amounts to around a couple hundred cell types [@url:https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_distinct_cell_types_in_the_adult_human_body&oldid=1044853788].
However, the Cell Ontology has so far had catalogued 2,311 cell types of interest for the Human Cell Atlas as of June 2021 [@wikidata:Q107373831], increasing the estimate by at least one order of magnitude. 
Additionally, with an estimate of 37 trillion cells on average per human body [@wikidata:Q34037445] and an ever-increasing report of new cell types/clusters in single-cell transcriptomics ([@wikidata:Q103034964]), a precise estimate is not reasonable. 
In fact, the Human Cell Atlas project itself does not commit to any estimates of numbers of cell types, due to the sheer difficulty of estimating a number given current knowledge. (Aviv Regev; reply to question in the HCA conference) 

<!-- Text from https://github.com/lubianat/technotype/blob/9f428cbcf8e8a8d2843faac684275fb0c37914ed/content/02.introduction.md BEGIN-->

Even though there is no agreement, different views on cell types are maturing. 
One core line of thought to define "cell type" is based on the cell type as an evolutionary unit defined by a Core Regulatory Complex (CoRC) of transcription factors. That definition enables the drawing of parallels, from the evolution of other biological entities (such as genes, proteins, and species) to cell types' evolution. Models of how multicellular life works greatly benefit from concepts such as "sister types" (cell types that diverged from a single ancestor), "cell type homology" (cell types in different species that share a common evolutionary origin), and "cell type convergence" (cell types that execute similar functions but which are not directly evolutionarily related) [@pmid:18927580; @doi:10.1038/nrg.2016.127]

Another direction is based on the notion of attractors: regions of dynamical stability in a feature space, which might have different qualities. [@wikidata:Q37475461; @wikidata:Q91908361] In this theory, "basins of attraction" direct cell phenotypes, providing points in, say, a gene expression space towards which different cells "move" their expression programs. This dynamic view see each cell type corresponding to "a self-stabilizing regulatory program, which acts to maintain and restore the cell type-specific program of gene expression." [@wikidata:Q90361677] It alligns itself with dynamic systems theory, and some authors go as far as to say that "Lacking the idea of attractors we have no clear idea of what a cell type is." [@wikidata:Q91316993]

As much as different concepts of species coexist [@doi:10.1080/10635150701701083], our quest to define cell types may take various forms. The challenge of representing cell types in the context of evolution is conceptually different from representing cell types in biomedical experimentation. In that second direction, the groundwork of the Cell Ontology [@wikidata:Q21184168; @doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-6; @doi:10.1186/s13326-016-0088-7] and CELDA [@wikidata:Q21284308] and the contributions of the International Workshop on Cells in Experimental Life Sciences series [@doi:10.1186/s12859-017-1976-2; @doi:10.1186/s12859-019-2721-9] are notable. 

<!-- Text from https://github.com/lubianat/technotype/blob/9f428cbcf8e8a8d2843faac684275fb0c37914ed/content/02.introduction.md END-->

Even though many sources of knowledge contribute to our knowledge about cell types [@wikidata:Q109717199], arguably single-cell transcriptomics is the workhorse for current efforts of the HUman cell Atlas, with an increasing amount of published studies using the methodology and of cells per study. [@wikidata:Q109717199]
Current scRNA-seq data analyses often rely on unsupervised clustering of cells followed by assignment of cell-type labels to clusters.
For the clustering, bioinformaticians tailor parameter sets to a target resolution, i.e., the level of detail used to detect cell identities. [@wikidata:Q64974172] [@wikidata:Q46368626]
 When the clustering is finished, the groups of cells are annotated with class labels, representing the underlying biology in a language we can understand. [@wikidata:Q107158224]


Instead of assigning expression gates from pre-defined markers, as is the standard for flow-cytometry analysis, single-cell RNA-seq analysis pipelines usually start from _de novo_ clustering of cells followed by cluster annotation. [@wikidata:Q64974172]
While it is clear that clusters and cell types are different concepts [@wikidata:Q64974172], often cluster labels are treated as cell types. 
There are a number of ways to cluster cells to find groups of similarity, but arguably the current default is dirived on the methodology proposed by PhenoGraph. [@wikidata:Q30975629]
The protocol is to calculate the distances between cells in a reduced PCA space (with the number of dimensions chosen by the experimenters), followed by constructing a k-nearest-neighbours network, in which each cell is a node connected by _k_ (another parameter) edges to other cells. 
Once the network is build, network modules (i.e. cell clusters) are commonly found using the Louvain algorithm, published in 2008 by researchers of the Université catholique de Louvain, in Belgium. [@wikidata:Q29305711]
The cell clusters found by the PhenoGraph (or any other) algorithm are then labeled by domain experts, often based on genes differentially expressed on each cluster, so-called "markers". [@wikidata:Q64974172]

While it is possible to manually investigate the identities of which clusters, automatic methods have been developed to aid on the task. [@wikidata:Q107158224]
One approach ("marker-based automatic annotation") bases itself on crossing clusters markers in the analyzed dataset with previous knowledge from databases like PanglaoDB [@wikidata:Q63664483] and CellMarker [@wikidata:Q56984510] [@wikidata:Q107158224].
Another approach (reference-based automatic cell annotation) relies on base, expert-annotated datasets as references from which labels are transferred to the dataset of interest. [@wikidata:Q107158224] 
Other methods bypass the clustering step and focus on labelling the individual cells, which avoids lumping dissimilar cells together, but require a high amount of reads per individual cells for it to be efficient. [@wikidata:Q107158224] 
A recent review and tutorial by Clarke et al [@wikidata:Q107158224] provides an extensive account of current techniques. 

Of note, even though a range of methods is available, the vast majority of techniques and publications do not use standard identifiers for cell types. 
This is in contradiction with the acknowledgement by the community of the advantages of using identifiers the ad using standard identifiers, such as those provided by the Cell Ontology. [@wikidata:Q107158224] [@wikidata:Q33037209] [@wikidata:Q107373831] [@wikidata:Q36067763] [@wikidata:Q52625486]

- Cell Ontology use in labelings

- Cell Ontology as a source of common identifiers

- Ontologies (which will be discussed later) as a fundamental step for literature-based discovery
