
## Literature Based Discovery
 <!-- - 1.1. The quest for interoperable knowledge -->
The amount of scholar information vastly outnumbers what single researchers can fathom. 
Nevertheless, the gap between single individuals and the collectively body of knowledge has been widening in 
an accelerated fashion.
The explosion in the number of published articles is leading to a "tsunami of knowlegde",
flooding the scientific literature with rich information. 
That trend became spacially clear during the COVID-19 pandemic, when the huge amount of research published made keeping up with the literature pratically impossible. [@url:https://www.science.org/news/2020/05/scientists-are-drowning-covid-19-papers-can-new-tools-keep-them-afloat @url:https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-03564-y] 
At the same time, articles themselves are becoming denser, as high-throughput (and high-information) technologies
like single-cell RNA-sequencing get cheaper and widely used. 
In practice, thus, too much of the knowledge generated remains unseen by any individual researcher, limiting the reach of science in general.  

 <!-- - 1.1. The quest for interoperable knowledge -->
 <!-- - 1.2.3. Web of Data and Linked Open Data -->
The technological advances, however, are no yet met by equivalent knowledge-handling systems.
Mainstream scientific publication is, nowadays, barely readable by machines.
Articles are written for human consumption, using ambiguous natural language and relying on implicit conventions. 
Tables and data rarely make use of technical standars, such as employing URIs (Uniform Resource Identifiers or encoding information in RDF formats. 
In fact, those standards and their acronyms are foreign for most life scientists (personal observations), despite
being the _de jure_ gold standard for data quality. [@url:https://5stardata.info/en/]
Interconnecting biomedical knowledge is an open challenge of our century, and there is a large way to go
before society can fully benefit from the sum of all knowledge we generate. 

<!--- 1.1.1. Literature Based Discovery, hidden knowledge and text-mining -->
The scientific community has pursue solutions for this tsunami of information from many different angles. 
Narrative reviews, systematic reviews and textbooks compile and synthetize information, providing a layer of processing. 
Biocuration efforts go a step further and transform unstructured information into structured information
in knowledgebases, such as UniProt [@wikidata:Q102383737] and PDB. 
Text-mining apply a range of Natural Language Processing tools to try and extract biological relations,
or provide guidance for biocurators. 
Elaborate knowlegde networks, like the STRING database [@wikidata:Q102383784] and Wikidata[@wikidata:Q87830400], 
combine information from different sources. 

<!-- - 1.1.1.1. Literature Based Discovery (explicitly) --->

The synthesis effort of literature mining is not only an exhibition of the scientific claims in the literature.
Interconnected knowledge provides a way to discover new, implicit knowledge, by applying logical reasoning to a dataset. 
A field denominated Literature Based Discovery [@url:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literature-based_discovery] dedicates itself to this challenge: make actual discoveries (or at least very strong hypothesis) using as material plainly the existing literature. [@wikidata:Q38371706]
The textbook example of Literature Based Discovery is described by Don Swanson's ABC model: If A is related do B, and B is related to C, then A and C are indirectly related [@wikidata:Q36280460].
In a seminal paper, Swanson showed an hypothesis about using fish oil (A) to treat Raynauld's disease (C), demonstrating that even though the specialized fish-oil (A) literature had shown its association (AB) with a set of blood parameters (B), and the specialized Raynauld's disease literature had show its association (BC) with the same set of parameters (B), the AC link was never made in the literature, despite its seeming obviousness [@wikidata:Q36280460]

<!--- 1.1.1. Literature Based Discovery, hidden knowledge and text-mining -->

Modern advancements of literature-based discovery rely on Natural Language Processing, Machine Learning and Knowledge graphs to make inferences on literature knowledge.
Word embeddings, for example, are leading inference of properties of compounds based on their shared neighbourhood of words (the words before and after their mentiongs) with known compounds, thus making use of latent knowledge in the body of knowledge. [@wikidata:Q91595456]
Other, more explicit approaches, rely on extracted relations embedded in knowledge graphs. As an example, the discovery of new RNA-binding proteins related to Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis by analysis of the Watson Drug Discovery gene-disease network. [@wikidata:Q47406275]

Knowledge graphs have a set of characteristics that make then useful for Literature Based Discovery: they represent multiple relations, allow inferences on top of those relations, and provide human understandability at every step, allowing for a dialog between expert humans and computing systems.
The field of biomedical ontologies explores that direction in depth, and the community is building many solutions, widely applicable for the biomedical sciences.

For the Human Cell Atlas Project (as presented in the chapter <!-- 1.4. The challenges of the Human Cell Atlas -->) to maximize its benefit for society, it is arguably important that its knowledge products are inserted into the main route of automated knowledge discovery . 
That implies a task of building knowledge graphs able to deal with it at all layers, including the generated data and metadata, its range of different protocols, and the purified knowledge projects that are enshrined in publications.
Thus, the chapter <!-- - 1.2. Formal representation of knowledge and - 1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology -->  will present challenges and paths for applying literature based discovery on a large scale and with sufficient flexibility to deal with the Human Cell Atlas. 