
# Abstract
The Human Cell Atlas (HCA) is an international effort aiming at characterizing every cell type of the human body. 
By the virtue of tecniques such as single-cell RNA sequencing, mass cytometry, and multiplexed in situ hybridization, HCA members are producing cell-level data from virtually all human tissues. 
This wealth of data can have a significant impact on biomedical research, but only if its content is genuinely interoperable.
While ontologies and semantic technologies have emerged as key players in the data interoperability ecosystem, there are still gaps to cover between the technical possibilities and the practical applications in biomedical research.
In addition to ontologies, like the Cell Ontology and the Gene Ontology, large-scale knowledge graphs are growing as a tool for knowledge makanagement. 
Among those, Wikidata, a sister project of Wikipedia for structured data, is surfacing as a hub in the semantic web for multiple types of information. 
The formatting and deployment of information from the Human Cell Atlas to Wikidata can increase information availability and impact, conecting the scientific products with the larger knowledge ecosystem.
This PhD project aims at studying Wikidata as a platfomr for representing cell types, adressing theoretical and pratical concerns.  
We are reviewing the literature on cell types, refining and formalizing concepts for cell type delimitation.
At the same time, we are enriching Wikidata with new classes curated from the literature, and with large scale integrations of biomedical databases (e.g. PanglaoDB) into the Wikidata infrastructure.
To aid that effort, we are developing Wikidata Bib, a framework for literature management and organized note-taking and recording system for reading the academic literature with high efficiency. 
Finally, we plan to improve the interplay of Wikidata, the Cell Ontology and software used for single-cell RNA-seq data, inserting Wikidata _de facto_ as a tool for the Human Cell Atlas community. 