# Preface

Here we present an overview of the different chapters that compose this document, presented as the text for a qualifying exam.  
This work is concerned with the conceptual modelling of knowledge about cell types. 
The introduction contains an overview of the Human Cell Atlas project, and the current state of classification of cells into types. 
Then, it proceeds to introduce ontologies and knowledge graphs as tools for connecting what we know about cells. 

The methodology section is an overview of the core methods used throughout the work. 
However, as the project contains elements from different scientific traditions, the results chapters might also display particular methods used in the specific branch of the project. 

It is worth noticing that the different results shown were not developed chronologically in the order shown. 
They were actually developed in parallel, with overlapping periods of activity. 
They have been organized into separate chapters, however, as they tackle different perspectives of the subject matter, and are part of different publications. 

The discussion on the concept of cell type is presented first, as it is instrumental for the later steps. 
It is followed by an account of how PanglaoDB, a database of cell markers, was integrated to Wikidata, based on a notion of species-specific cell type clarified in the preceding chapter. 

Then, we present Wikidata Bib, a framework for organized reading of the literature. 
The framework, althoug used as a method throughout the PhD project, is presented in the results session.
This emphasis as a result was chosen as the technical and theoretical details of the system are part of the intelectual work put into the project. 
The system evolved into a biocuration platform for the collection of cell types from the literature to Wikidata, and the statistics on this curation are also presented on the section. 

To end the results, we discuss how our efforts integrate with the Cell Ontology, the currently leading system for organizing cell types. 

Finally, an account of other academic aspects of the project are presented, as part of the qualification requirements. 
They present an overview of collaborations, participation in events and academic courses taken during the first part of the PhD project. 

