## Background {.page_break_before}

<!-- 1.4. The challenges of the Human Cell Atlas -->
## The Human Cell Atlas (HCA) Project

<!-- 1.4.1. The Human Cell Atlas project and its scope -->
<!-- 1.4.1.1. Participants -->

The Human Cell Atlas (HCA) project is, arguably, the biggest multinational biomedical project of the present time, running since 2017 to characterize every cell type in the human body [@wikidata:Q46368626]. 
The HCA consortium gathers people from all over the world to tackle different parts of the project to have a diverse and equitable account of the cell type diversity. [@wikidata:Q100491106]  
It intends to "ultimately describe at least 10 billion cells, covering all tissues, organs, and systems" and, to achieve such bold goals, it commits to "to open membership, to the open and immediate data release with no restrictions, and to open-source code for all computational approaches". [@wikidata:Q46368626] 

<!-- - 1.4.1.2. Overview of main analytical techniques  -->
Building a complete atlas of human cells comes with multiple challenges. 
The project includes the detection, in single cells, of RNA species (scRNA-Seq), chromatin accessibility (scATAC-Seq), and protein markers (primarily by CYTOF), as well as spatial information on cells with multiplexed _in situ_ hybridization (such as MERFISH) and imaging mass cytometry [@wikidata:Q46368626 ;@wikidata:Q104450645]. 
The HCA is set to revolutionize the biomedical sciences by creating tools and standards for basic research, allowing better characterization of disease, and improving diagnostics and therapy. 
Its products (data, information, knowledge and wisdom) need to be FAIR: findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable.
Data stewardship and management are growing as core demands of the scientific community, ranging from data management plans [@wikidata:Q56524391] to specialized data personnel [@wikidata:Q56524391].

<!-- 1.4.3. Data availability -->
<!-- - 1.4.3.1. As coordinated by the Human Cell Atlas -->
The Human Cell Atlas has a dedicated team for organizing data: the Data Coordination Platform (DCP) [@url:https://data.humancellatlas.org/about] [@wikidata:Q104450645].
The DCP is responsible for tracing the plan for computational interoperability, from the data generators to the consumers.[@wikidata:Q104450645].
The Human Cell Atlas has its portal for data [@url:https://data.humancellatlas.org]), which composes the data repository landscape with other resources, like the Broad Institute Single Cell Portal [https://singlecell.broadinstitute.org/single_cell>) and the Chan-Zuckerberg Biohub Tabula Sapiens (<https://tabula-sapiens-portal.ds.czbiohub.org/>). 
In addition to its core team, the HCA is poised to grow by community interaction. 
As stated in its opening publication "As with the Human Genome Project, a robust plan will best emerge from wide-ranging scientific discussions and careful planning".[@wikidata:Q46368626]  
Thus, this project inserts itself among the wide-ranging scientific discussions to improve data - and knowledge - interoperability. 

The highlight of "knowledge" in the last paragraph is meant to stress that raw data _per se_ is not enough to turn the Atlas objectives into reality. 
There is a long way from raw datasets to commonly-agreed scientific knowledge. 
Currently, the gap between data and knowledge is attempted by writing and sharing scientific manuscripts, the _de facto_ currency of exchange of claims about the natural world. 
A Human Cell Atlas Publication Committee reviews and selects publications, [@url:https://www.humancellatlas.org/publications] presenting the papers as one of the significant outputs of the whole endeavour.
As of december 2021, the list includes 96 different publications, which, arguably, expose only a fraction of the knowledge extractable from the underlying data. 

The challenge that arises is one of managing a wealth of information and casting it into useful knowledge.
Ideally, we would like to understand, remember, and use every statement produced by the HCA.
As this goal is humanely impossible, we need to develop tools to make the knowledge interoperable with the aid of computers. 
At that point, the challenges of the HCA enter in resonance with the challenges of biocuration, and with the goals of this project.

One core step for knowledge management is the minting of identifiers for the concepts of interest. [@wikidata:Q33037209]
The minting of identifiers, however, depend on clear, well defined entities. 
The sheer notion of "cell type" is undefined [@wikidata:Q46368626], a challenge for organizing both data and knowledge. 
Accordingly, this PhD project concerns itself also with the theoretical basis of defining a "cell type". 
Thus, the next chapter will introduce the state-of-the-art of classifying cell into types, in a preparation for the chapter on knowledge modelling and the theoretical discussions of the results section.

