## Ontologies
<!-- - 1.2. Formal representation of knowledge and - 1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology --> 

The classification of biological concepts is at the core of biology. At least since the Aristotelian endeavours to group classes of animals, a good part of the scientific work is to capture concepts into knowledge systems   [@wikidata:Q105870680]. 
Linnaeus' binomial system for naming species and Mendeleev's periodic table are likely the two most famous classification systems but are part of a much larger ecosystem of structuring scientific knowledge. 

<!-- - 1.2.1. Descriptional logic and its historical context -->

On the 20th century, the development of the analytical philosophy of Russel and Wittgenstein and their search for formalizations  [@wikidata:Q105105637] gradually layed the foundations for the the logic of scientific descriptions.
Karl Popper and his "The Logic of Scientific Discovery"[@wikidata:Q1868040] was heavily influenced by analytical  philosophy.
Less known among life scientists, Tarski's inquiries on what can be considered to be "true" [@wikidata:Q106090790] were also foundational for formal ontologies. 
In the end of the 20th century, the tradition of analytic philosophy contributed to the rise of applied ontology, which provided the theoretical basis for the computational ontlogies from the early 21st centhury.  [@wikidata:Q110015932]

The whole movement for formalization of knowledge progressed on the computational end. At the late 20th century, the advent of computational ontologies and large-scale knowledge graphs were at the root of the functioning of the World Wide Web.
This chapter will provide an overview of ontologies and knowledge graphs and their use in today's biomedical sciences, alongside its future prospects. 

### The OBO Foundry and biomedical ontologies

An ontology, as used here, is a formal computational representation of reality, which tries to represent each concept (and their relations) as precisely as possible.  [@wikidata:Q105870680]  
Constructing an ontology is a process of selecting and defining terms of interest, selecting and defining relationships of interest and making statements about reality using terms and relationships. 
The Gene Ontology is probably the most well known biomedical ontology; it describes (among other things) different classes of biological process related to each_other by "is_a" and "part_of relations. [@wikidata:Q104130127] [@wikidata:Q23781406].


The Gene Ontology is part of a much larger effort to formalize concepts across biology: the Open Biomedical and Biological Ontologies (OBO) Foundry. [@wikidata:Q19671692]
Created in 2007, the OBO Foundry is a hub of biomedical ontologies that sets guidelines for designing and constructing high-quality ontologies. 
Under a common framework towards interoperability, the initial OBO Foundry united several independent ontologies (like the Cell Ontology, the Disease Ontology and the Protein Ontology). 
At the same time, the creation of the Relation Ontology (RO) provided a go-to point for relations in biology that different ontologies could reuse.

### OWL and ontology languages 
One of the OBO Principles for its ontologies is that they should be resolvable as a "syntactically valid OWL file using the RDF-XML syntax." (http://www.obofoundry.org/principles/fp-002-format.html). 
The OWL Web Ontology Language was introduced as a standard by the W3C consortium in 2004. 
OWL is not a programming language, as it does not instruct computers to perform actions, but an ontology language, which allows computerizable descriptions of the world. 
Furthermore, it is an umbrella ontology language that includes several languages with varying levels of expressivity. 
Generally, more expressive languages can represent more complex ideas but make computations harder.

Regardless of ontology's sublanguage, it must be resolvable to an RDF-XML file. 
RDF stands for Resource Description Framework, another W3C standard built around a graph-based data model [@url:https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/]. 
Statements in RDF are triples consisting of 2 nodes (a subject and an object) and an edge (a predicate) connecting the nodes. 
All nodes and edges are represented in RDFs by International Resource Identifiers (IRIs), and there are many ways to lay out those IRIs on a text file to represent triples. 
One of those layouts is the RDF-XML syntax, inspired by the XML markup language. 
Arguably, other syntaxes (interchangeable with RDF-XML) are easier to read for a human. 
As an example of an RDF triple, here is how one would represent in the Turtle RDF Syntax, the notion that plasmacytoid dendritic cells are a type of dendritic cells:

```
http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/CL_0000784  http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#subClassOf  http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/CL_0000451 .
```
Where http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/CL_0000784 and  http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/CL_0000451  are the unique IDs in the Cell Ontology for "plasmacytoid dendritic cells" and dendritic cells, respectively, and http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#subClassOf is the identifier for the "subclass of" relation as defined by the RDF schema. 

A longer explanation of the details of OWL and RDF is outside the scope of this work. 
This brief introduction has a dual goal of introducing the architecture of formal representations and demonstrating the system's complexity.
There is a high energy barrier to acquiring the knowledge and the technical skills to engage in ontology building. 
That complexity might be one of the reasons why a tiny fraction of the biomedical communities represent data with ontologies, and an even smaller fraction engages with ontology building. 