## Wikidata Bib and a professional system for biocuration

### Introduction 

* Accountants have Double-entry bookkeeping (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double-entry_bookkeeping), software developers have Test-driven development (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test-driven_development).

* Develop a professional way for coverage of large-scale revisions, inspired by Umberto Eco's How to Write a Thesis [@wikidata:Q3684178] adapted to the digital environment, using version-control and semantic links. 

* Connect the reading framework with a Biocuration strategy to feed knowledge to Wikidata



### Working of the system

It consists of a set of Python scripts and a standard file structure. A file contains the list of articles to be read in markdown. Articles are represented as Wikidata QIDs which enables automatic information retrieval from Wikidata's structured systems.  Articles were organized in 2 main sections, one for cell-type related articles and one for biocuration-related articles. 

The Wikidata Bib system has a "pop" function, which creates a personalized note document in markdown for the first article of a section and (if possible) obtains the full text article from Unpaywall (https://unpaywall.org/). The note document contains a space for highlights, which can be copied from the original text and pasted in the markdown file.
Notes and additional information are saved in a GitHub repository, and the structured information powers a live website with analytics on the users recent readings. The source code for Wikidata Bib is available at https://github.com/lubianat/wikidata_bib/tree/template and notes on my readings can currently be accessed at https://lubianat.github.io/wikidata_bib/.

Besides the technical aspects of Wikidata Bib, the organized reading methodology included a discipline step of continued reading, with a target of 1-2 papers per section per day. Based on Umberto Eco's suggestion on How to Write a Thesis [@wikidata:Q3684178] to develop a careful indexing system for literature, an index document was constructed containing the topics of interest for writing the thesis. The topics were added as plain text in the personalized note documents, allowing batch retrieval of articles of interest via the command line, using `grep` (https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Grep&oldid=1039541979).  

### Results 

* Total number of cells on Wikidata
* Cells edited/added by me
